Who here has ever heard the phrase,
machine code?
Yeah me, when you think of machine code,
what do you think of?
You think of that binary ones and
zeros, right?
And that's technically correct,
the best kind of correct, but
generally when the low level
program is referred to machine code
,we're describing what's
called hexadecimal.
And if you thought reading
binary was tricky,
I got some bad news for you,
it gets a little more tricky.
But essentially,
hex is the lowest form of computing we can
do when we talk about machine code.
We can't read ones and zeros,
it just wouldn't make any sense,
we wouldn't know where the breaks are,
we wouldn't know if we're talking about
an 8 bit integer or a 16 bit integer.
We don't know if it's signed or
unsigned things like that.
So we use hex,
hex is an abbreviated form of binary and
we can actually convert back and forth.
Just hex is a human readable format,
and I'm putting air quotes on
readable because you'll see it may
not seem reasonable at first, but
once you understand how to decode hex,
you'll be like, so actually computer
instructions are just numbers that you
call and those perform some operation?
Yeah, and those numbers
are actually just ones and zeros?
Yeah, that's how computers work.
Which is like super fascinating.
We rarely get a chance to go this deep,
but you have to today cuz you're stuck
here with me, so I appreciate that and
let me and letting me nerd out about this.
So I've said before hexadecimal,
it's an intermediate step between binary
and sort of high level programming.
It's, concise enough for machines serene,
so it's very short, it's very abbreviated.
It's generally only,
we'll say 3 characters or
so sometimes 2, sometimes more,
but usually 2 or 3.
So it's very fast to read if
you know what you're doing.
So it's good for machines and
it's good for humans.
It's kinda the in between stuff because,
like we said, writing ones and
zeros just isn't that practical.
And I wanna note here before you get
intimidated and you close your laptop and
say screw Jams, your friend and
masters, this is not relevant at all,
I don't need you to memorize
how to read hexadecimal.
I don't think necessarily that's
gonna make you a better engineer,
and that's all I wanted the other
day to make you a better engineer.
All right, but I think it's important
to know how it is or how it works and
how to read it, just at a super high level
so that when you see it in the future, and
you will if you're dealing web assembly.
That you're like, okay I don't know
what 0X27 means, but I know how to
convert that and I know generally,
what that means because I know that,
that's actually a number in
his calling instructions.
When we think about hex, we said binary
is base 2, so that's a 100 zero.
Our current number system is decimal base,
so that's zero through 9.
hexadecimal is base 16, so
that means it goes 1, 16, 256, 512, etc.
And this is the part, I think,
cuz I tried to learn hexidecimal for
years and I always give up,
I give up really early.
So I'm teaching you how I learned it,
actually, fairly recently I would say.
Just because I had to know I got so
frustrated with that building
something and I'm an engineer and I've
been an engineer for many years now, and
there's parts that I don't know,
so I try to dive in.
So the part that is gonna throw you,
is that hex uses the letters
A through F to represent numbers.
And that's where it looks confusing.
So when you see something like 0X2E7,
and you're like, what?
Is that programming?
What are we even doing here?
Know that the letter E stands for 14.
So now you can think of like,
that's 214 and a 7.
And it's written that way so
we can get all the way up to basic
scene without repeating ourselves.
Now converting it is a little tricky,
that's why I have this handy
image here to help you process.
So two 2E7 is equivalent
to the number 743.
And we got that through math, up but
all we're doing is multiplying the value
of the number against that position.
So in this, in our instance or example of
2E7, the 2 is at the leftmost position.
So that represents 256 multiplied by 2
plus 16 because the next position is 16,
that's E, and E represents 14 times 7,
that's how we get 743.
Are you confused, a little bit, no?
I see head saying no, you got it.
All right, I know,
intuitively you look at it and
doesn't really make sense.
But once you remember that it's base
16 and that letters represent a number,
we see that actually
this is just a number.
And actually all of the computer
instructions generally that
we read are going to be in hex, and
computer structures are just numbers.
So we can't manually call, say add,
we can't manually add two numbers,
but we call an instruction like 0X2D,
which points to a number,
which actually represents
an instruction on machine level code.
And that's why it's called
machine level code.
So we're going down, we're getting
in there, it's getting gnarly.
Okay, so just a quick exercise just so
you know,
because I really want you to kind of grasp
this concept, because hex is one of those
things that programmers look at and
they just walk away and give up.
We'll do a quick exercise,
what does 1F7 equal in numbers?
So, 1F7, I'll give you a minute.
And remember, here's our handy handy
table of, we know that F equals 15,
and we know that 1 is in 256 place
is in the value it represents,
and while you're thinking of that,
check out this site, it's by the BBC.
I don't know why, but I happened
to come across this, and honestly,
it is one of the easiest sites I've
seen for how to understand hexadecimal,
how to convert from that to binary and
how that works on our decimal base system.
So shout out to the BBC, who knew?
And, all right,
anybody have the answer yet?
I see a hand in our chat, go ahead.
>> So just the question, so
the hex number is in itself,
the instructions to recreate a number?
>> Yes, well actually this converts
down to binary where we think of it in
terms of numbers because that makes
sense to us at a cognitive level.
But actually this converts
down into ones and zeros.
But when I say number, it's always
a representation of the ones and
zeros, it's just, I can't say
000001 means 1 in actual computing.
So we say, 001 in terms of hex or
we just say the number 1,
I know it's a little tricky.
But this really, for me this clarifies
things for me learning assembly.
This clarified how to
think about computing and
that everything is just
a number at the core.
There's no strings, there's no objects,
there's no struts, it's just a number.
And those numbers represent
an actual binary bit of code,
which represents a machine
level instruction.
Yeah, I see people still nodding
haven't lost yet, thank goodness.
>> What is the problem with
the decimal system instead of using
hexadecimal can we use this one?
>> So,
I hate asking rhetorical questions but
at a low level,
how would we represent a decimal number?
We would do it with binary.
But because a decimal number has a points,
it's actually known as
a floating point number.
All right, it has a point and
then it has almost an infinite number of
zeros this way on the right hand side and
has an infinite number of zeros and
ones on the left hand side.
So we couldn't really
use a decimal system,
because at the core we still
need representing in binary.
And to get the proper precision
on decimals, we take a very,
very, very, very, long number.
Versus when we use hex,
it's very short, it's very readable and
it converts to a very,
very small binary code.
At the core, we really want computers
to be as fast as possible and
by being as fast as possible that means
processing as small in number as possible,
as few bits as possible to
get our desired outcome.
So remember I said I'm
gonna nerd out a bit more.
Computer CPU is just a bunch of switches,
it's going to [SOUND] Really fast.
I mean, we can't even
comprehend how fast they move.
And what it's doing is,
it's loading information from
what's known as the register.
I didn't put this in the notes
because it's not totally necessary,
but you asked them to nerd out.
It's known as the register, and
the register is just a cache of ones and
zeros at the lowest level.
And what the CPU does is, it grabs
instructions from the register and
grabs data from register.
It performs operations from them, and then
puts them either back in the register or
it sends those out to the larger
computer which gets stored in RAM and
things like that.
But because we can, model processors or
any processor at all,
can only move so much data at once.
It can only go [SOUND], the switches
can only move so fast at a time.
We really want to maximize the amount
of computation we can do per cycle.
And that's what it's called,
is a cycle, is when a computer,
it runs through all the instruction says
give me some more, give me some more,
give me some more and
it just is constantly doing that.
So, we really want this instruction
to be as small as possible so
we can fit as many instructions
per CPU clock cycle as possible.
So in that case,
we wouldn't use floating point number of
decimal because they're just too large.
We can accomplish the same thing at a much
smaller footprint, good question though.
Okay, back to the what does
the numbers represent?
It represents 503, and
we got that by multiplying 256 by 1,
it's in the first position,
F is equal to 15,
multiply that by 16 plus 7, we get 503.
Okay, I know you're like well, I sorta
get it now, I don't see the utility.
Again, this is because you'll probably
come across this as you'll all
be expert web assembly programmers
in the future I'm hoping.
You will come across this because assembly
uses hex to represent most of its
instructions or technically,
if you're decompiling a program as in
reverse engineering, you'll see
the written text, it'll just be a series
of hexadecimal numbers and
it just looks like gibberish to you.
Alright, it looks like
gibberish to most programmers.
But now you see that those
are actually numbers and
those numbers correspond to either actual
numbers or instructions to the computer.
Question in the chat, yes.
>> Why is it, so
it was 116 2026 it's not 1 8 32?
>> Yeah, so
our explanation earlier was that
the base system represents
at a given position,
what are the possible values for
that position?
So base 2 means there's only two
possible combinations, one and zero,
base 10 means zero through 9,
base 16 means there
are 16 possible different numbers for
a possible combination.
So we start off at,
we always start at one,
because we need a one to get odd numbers.
It's funny enough yet,
if we started at just 16,
if we would only have positive numbers
which would make computing a little weird.
So that's why it goes from 16
to 256 instead of 8 and etc.
Why base 16?
Honestly, I don't know,
I would imagine it's to fit the maximum
number of instructions so you wanna have
the widest possible number of possible
characters, without getting too big,
but without getting into 32 bit number or
32 or 64, things like that.
But yeah, I think there are historical
reasons why it's base 16,
I'm not terribly familiar.
I just accept that's how the universe is,
I don't fight against it.